docs/technical_information.rst, before:

.. _technical_information:

Technical Information
=====================
This section details technical information of the quantification and statistical estimation procedures of the :code:`dynast count` and :code:`dynast estimate` commands. Descriptions of :code:`dynast ref` and :code:`dynast align` commands are in :ref:`pipeline_usage`.

.. image:: _static/steps.svg
	:width: 700
	:align: center

Count procedure
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^
:code:`dynast count` procedure consists of three steps:

1. :ref:`parse`
2. :ref:`snp`
3. :ref:`quant`

.. _parse:

:code:`parse`
'''''''''''''
1. All gene and transcript information are parsed from the gene annotation GTF (:code:`-g`) and saved as Python pickles :code:`genes.pkl.gz` and :code:`transcripts.pkl.gz`, respectively.
2. All aligned reads are parsed from the input BAM and output to :code:`conversions.csv` and :code:`no_conversions.csv`. The former contains a line for every conversion, and the latter contains a line for every read that does not have any conversions. Note that no conversion filtering (:code:`--quality`) is performed in this step. Two :code:`.idx` files are also output, corresponding to each of these CSVs, which are used downstream for fast parsing. Splicing types are also assigned in this step if :code:`--no-splicing` was not provided.

.. _snp:

:code:`snp`
'''''''''''
This step is skipped if :code:`--snp-threshold` is not specified.

1. Read coverage of the genome is computed by parsing all aligned reads from the input BAM and output to :code:`coverage.csv`.
2. SNPs are detected by calculating, for every genomic position, the fraction of reads with a conversion at that position over its coverage. If this fraction is greater than :code:`--snp-threshold`, then the genomic position is written to the output file :code:`snps.csv`. Any conversion with PHRED quality less than or equal to :code:`--quality` is not counted as a conversion.

.. _quant:

:code:`quant`
'''''''''''''
1. For every read, the numbers of each conversion (A>C, A>G, A>T, C>A, etc.) and nucleotide content (how many of A, C, G, T there are in the region that the read aligned to) are counted. Any SNPs provided with :code:`--snp-csv` or detected from the :ref:`snp` step are not counted. If both are present, the union is used. Additionally, Any conversion with PHRED quality less than or equal to :code:`--quality` is not counted as a conversion.
2. For UMI-based technologies, reads are deduplicated by the following order of priority: 1) read that aligns to the transcriptome, 2) read with the most conversions specified with :code:`--conversion`. If multiple conversions are provided, the sum is used. Reads are considered duplicates if they share the same barcode, UMI, and gene assignment. For plate-based technologies, read deduplication should have been performed in the alignment step (in the case of STAR, with the :code:`--soloUMIdedup Exact`), but in the case of multimapping reads, it becomes a bit more tricky. If a read is multimapping such that some alignments map to the transcriptome while some do not, the transcriptome alignment is taken (there can not be multiple transcriptome alignments, as this is a constraint within STAR). If none align to the transcriptome and the alignments are assigned to multiple genes, the read is dropped, as it is impossible to assign the read with confidence. If none align to the transcriptome and the alignments are assigned multiple velocity types, the velocity type is manually set to :code:`ambiguous` and the first alignment is kept. If none of these cases are true, the first alignment is kept. The final deduplicated/de-multimapped counts are output to :code:`counts_{conversions}.csv`, where :code:`{conversions}` is an underscore-delimited list of all conversions provided with :code:`--conversion`.

.. Note:: All bases in this file are relative to the forward genomic strand. For example, a read mapped to a gene on the reverse genomic strand should be complemented to get the actual bases.

Output Anndata
''''''''''''''
All results are compiled into a single AnnData :code:`H5AD` file. The AnnData object contains the following:

* The *transcriptome* read counts in :code:`.X`. Here, *transcriptome* reads are the mRNA read counts that are usually output from conventional scRNA-seq quantification pipelines. In technical terms, these are reads that contain the BAM tag provided with the :code:`--gene-tag` (default is :code:`GX`).
* Unlabeled and labeled *transcriptome* read counts in :code:`.layers['X_n_{conversion}']` and :code:`.layers['X_l_{conversion}']`.

The following layers are also present if :code:`--no-splicing` or :code:`--transcriptome-only` was *NOT* specified.

* The *total* read counts in :code:`.layers['total']`.
* Unlabeled and labeled *total* read counts in :code:`.layers['unlabeled_{conversion}']` and :code:`.layers['labeled_{conversion}']`.
* Spliced, unspliced and ambiguous read counts in :code:`.layers['spliced']`, :code:`.layers['unspliced']` and :code:`.layers['ambiguous']`.
* Unspliced unlabeled, unspliced labeled, spliced unlabeled, spliced labeled read counts in :code:`.layers['un_{conversion}']`, :code:`.layers['ul_{conversion}']`, :code:`.layers['sn_{conversion}']` and :code:`.layers['sl_{conversion}']` respectively.

The following equalities always hold for the resulting Anndata.

* :code:`.layers['total'] == .layers['spliced'] + .layers['unspliced'] + .layers['ambiguous']`

The following additional equalities always hold for the resulting Anndata in the case of single labeling (:code:`--conversion` was specified once).

* :code:`.X == .layers['X_n_{conversion}'] + .layers['X_l_{conversion}']`
* :code:`.layers['spliced'] == .layers['sn_{conversion}'] + .layers['sl_{conversion}']`
* :code:`.layers['unspliced'] == .layers['un_{conversion}'] + .layers['ul_{conversion}']`

.. Tip:: To quantify splicing data from conventional scRNA-seq experiments (experiments without metabolic labeling), we recommend using the `kallisto | bustools <https://www.kallistobus.tools/>`_ pipeline.

Estimate procedure
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^
:code:`dynast estimate` procedure consists of two steps:

1. :ref:`aggregate`
2. :ref:`estimate`

.. _aggregate:

:code:`aggregate`
'''''''''''''''''
For each cell and gene and for each conversion provided with :code:`--conversion`, the conversion counts are aggregated into a CSV file such that each row contains the following columns: cell barcode, gene, conversion count, nucleotide content of the original base (i.e. if the conversion is T>C, this would be T), and the number of reads that have this particular barcode-gene-conversion-content combination. This procedure is done for all read groups that exist (see :ref:`read_groups`).

.. _estimate:

:code:`estimate`
''''''''''''''''
1. The background conversion rate :math:`p_e` is estimated, if :code:`--p-e` was not provided (see :ref:`background_estimation`). If :code:`--p-e` was provided, this value is used and estimation is skipped. :math:`p_e`s are written to :code:`p_e.csv`.
2. The induced conversion rate :math:`p_c` is estimated using an expectation maximization (EM) approach, for each conversion provided with :code:`--conversion` (see :ref:`induced_rate_estimation`). :math:`p_c`s are written to :code:`p_c_{conversion}.csv` where :code:`{conversion}` is an underscore-delimited list of each conversion (because multiple conversions can be introduced in a single timepoint). This step is skipped for control samples with :code:`--control`.

Output Anndata
''''''''''''''
All results are compiled into a single AnnData :code:`H5AD` file. The AnnData object contains the following:

* The *transcriptome* read counts in :code:`.X`. Here, *transcriptome* reads are the mRNA read counts that are usually output from conventional scRNA-seq quantification pipelines. In technical terms, these are reads that contain the BAM tag provided with the :code:`--gene-tag` (default is :code:`GX`).
* Unlabeled and labeled *transcriptome* read counts in :code:`.layers['X_n_{conversion}']` and :code:`.layers['X_l_{conversion}']`. If :code:`--reads transcriptome` was specified, the estimated counts are in :code:`.layers['X_n_{conversion}_est']` and :code:`.layers['X_l_{conversion}_est']`. :code:`{conversion}` is an underscore-delimited list of each conversion provided with :code:`--conversion` when running :code:`dynast count`.

The following layers are also present if :code:`--no-splicing` or :code:`--transcriptome-only` was *NOT* specified when running :code:`dynast count`.

* The *total* read counts in :code:`.layers['total']`.
* Unlabeled and labeled *total* read counts in :code:`.layers['unlabeled_{conversion}']` and :code:`.layers['labeled_{conversion}']`. If :code:`--reads total` is specified, the estimated counts are in :code:`.layers['unlabeled_{conversion}_est']` and :code:`.layers['labeled_{conversion}_est']`.
* Spliced, unspliced and ambiguous read counts in :code:`.layers['spliced']`, :code:`.layers['unspliced']` and :code:`.layers['ambiguous']`.
* Unspliced unlabeled, unspliced labeled, spliced unlabeled, spliced labeled read counts in :code:`.layers['un_{conversion}']`, :code:`.layers['ul_{conversion}']`, :code:`.layers['sn_{conversion}']` and :code:`.layers['sl_{conversion}']` respectively. If :code:`--reads spliced` and/or :code:`--reads unspliced` was specified, layers with estimated counts are added. These layers are suffixed with :code:`_est`, analogous to *total* counts above.

In addition to the equalities listed in the :ref:`quant` section, the following inequalities always hold for the resulting Anndata.

* :code:`.X >= .layers['X_n_{conversion}_est'] + .layers['X_l_{conversion}_est']`
* :code:`.layers['spliced'] >= .layers['sn_{conversion}_est'] + .layers['sl_{conversion}_est']`
* :code:`.layers['unspliced'] >= .layers['un_{conversion}_est'] + .layers['ul_{conversion}_est']`

.. Tip:: To quantify splicing data from conventional scRNA-seq experiments (experiments without metabolic labeling), we recommend using the `kallisto | bustools <https://www.kallistobus.tools/>`_ pipeline.

Caveats
'''''''
The statistical estimation procedure described above comes with some caveats.

* The induced conversion rate (:math:`p_c`) can not be estimated for cells with too few reads (defined by the option :code:`--cell-threshold`).
* The fraction of labeled RNA (:math:`\pi_g`) can not be estimated for cell-gene combinations with too few reads (defined by the option :code:`--cell-gene-threshold`).

For statistical definitions of these variables, see :ref:`statistical_estimation`.

Therefore, for low coverage data, we expect many cell-gene combinations to not have any estimations in the Anndata layers prefixed with :code:`_est`, indicated with zeros. It is possible to construct a boolean mask that contains :code:`True` for cell-gene combinations that were successfully estimated and :code:`False` otherwise. Note that we are using *total* reads.

.. code-block:: python

  estimated_mask = ((adata.layers['labeled_{conversion}'] + adata.layers['unlabeled_{conversion}']) > 0) & \
      ((adata.layers['labeled_{conversion}_est'] + adata.layers['unlabeled_{conversion}_est']) > 0)

Similarly, it is possible to construct a boolean mask that contains :code:`True` for cell-gene combinations for which estimation failed (either due to having too few reads mapping at the cell level or the cell-gene level) and :code:`False` otherwise.

.. code-block:: python

  failed_mask = ((adata.layers['labeled_{conversion}'] + adata.layers['unlabeled_{conversion}']) > 0) & \
      ((adata.layers['labeled_{conversion}_est'] + adata.layers['unlabeled_{conversion}_est']) == 0)

The same can be done with other :ref:`read_groups`.

.. _read_groups:

Read groups
^^^^^^^^^^^
Dynast separates reads into read groups, and each of these groups are processed together.

* :code:`total`: All reads. Used only when :code:`--no-splicing` or :code:`--transcriptome-only` is not used.
* :code:`transcriptome`: Reads that map to the transcriptome. These are reads that have the :code:`GX` tag in the BAM (or whatever you provide for the :code:`--gene-tag` argument). This group also represents all reads when :code:`--no-splicing` or :code:`--transcriptome-only` is used.
* :code:`spliced`: Spliced reads
* :code:`unspliced`: Unspliced reads
* :code:`ambiguous`: Ambiguous reads

The latter three groups are mutually exclusive.

.. _statistical_estimation:

Statistical estimation
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^
Dynast can statistically estimate unlabeled and labeled RNA counts by modeling the distribution as a binomial mixture model [Jürges2018]_. Statistical estimation can be run with :code:`dynast estimate` (see :ref:`estimate`).

Overview
''''''''
First, we define the following model parameters. For the remainder of this section, let the conversion be T>C. Note that all parameters are calculated per barcode (i.e. cell) unless otherwise specified.

.. math::

  \begin{align*}
	  p_e &: \text{average conversion rate in unlabeled RNA}\\
		p_c &: \text{average conversion rate in labeled RNA}\\
		\pi_g &: \text{fraction of labeled RNA for gene } g\\
		y &: \text{number of observed T>C conversions (in a read)}\\
		n &: \text{number of T bases in the genomic region (a read maps to)}
	\end{align*}

Then, the probability of observing :math:`k` conversions given the above parameters is

.. math::

	\mathbb{P}(k;p_e,p_c,n,\pi) = (1-\pi_g) B(k;n,p_e) + \pi_g B(k;n,p_c)

where :math:`B(k,n,p)` is the binomial PMF. The goal is to calculate :math:`\pi_g`, which can be used the split the raw counts to get the estimated counts. We can extract :math:`k` and :math:`n` directly from the read alignments, while calculating :math:`p_e` and :math:`p_c` is more complicated (detailed below).

.. _background_estimation:

Background estimation (:math:`p_e`)
'''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''
If we have control samples (i.e. samples without the conversion-introducing treatment), we can calculate :math:`p_e` directly by simply calculating the mutation rate of T to C. This is exactly what dynast does for :code:`--control` samples. All cells are aggregated when calculating :math:`p_e` for control samples.

Otherwise, we need to use other mutation rates as a proxy for the real T>C background mutation rate. In this case, :math:`p_e` is calculated as the average conversion rate of all non-T bases to any other base. Mathematically,

.. math::

	p_e = average(r(A,C), r(A,G), \cdots, r(G,T))

where :math:`r(X,Y)` is the observed conversion rate from X to Y, and :math:`average` is the function that calculates the average of its arguments. Note that we do not use the conversion rates of conversions that start with a T. This is because T>C is our induced mutation, and this artificially deflates the T>A, T>G mutation rates (which can skew our :math:`p_e` estimation to be lower than it should). In the event that multiple conversions are of interest, and they span all four bases as the initial base, then :math:`p_e` estimation falls back to using all other conversions (regardless of start base).

.. _induced_rate_estimation:

Induced rate estimation (:math:`p_c`)
'''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''
:math:`p_c` is estimated via an expectation maximization (EM) algorithm by constructing a sparse matrix :math:`A` where each element :math:`a_{k,n}` is the number of reads with :math:`k` T>C conversions and :math:`n` T bases in the genomic region that each read align to. Assuming :math:`p_e < p_c`, we treat :math:`a_{k,n}` as missing data if greater than or equal to 1% of the count is expected to originate from the :math:`p_e` component. Mathematically, :math:`a_{k,n}` is excluded if

.. math::

	e_{k,n}=B(k,n,p_e) \cdot \sum_{k' \geq k} a_{k',n} > 0.01 a_{k,n}

Let :math:`X=\{(k_1,n_1),\cdots\}` be the excluded data. The E step fills in the excluded data by their expected values given the current estimate :math:`p_c^{(t)}`,

.. math::

	a_{k,n}^{(t+1)} = \frac{\sum_{(k',n) \not\in X} B(k,n,p_c^{(t)}) \cdot a_{k',n}}{\sum_{(k',n) \not\in X} B(k',n,p_c^{(t)})}

The M step updates the estimate for :math:`p_c`

.. math::

	p_c^{(t+1)} = \frac{\sum_{k,n} ka_{k,n}^{(t+1)}}{\sum_{k,n} na_{k,n}^{(t+1)}}

.. _bayesian_inference:

Bayesian inference (:math:`\pi_g`)
''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''
The fraction of labeled RNA :math:`\pi_g` is estimated with Bayesian inference using the binomial mixture model described above. A Markov chain Monte Carlo (MCMC) approach is applied using the :math:`p_e`, :math:`p_c`, and the matrix :math:`A` found/estimated in previous steps. This estimation procedure is implemented with `pyStan <https://pystan.readthedocs.io/en/latest/>`_, which is a Python interface to the Bayesian inference package `Stan <https://mc-stan.org/>`_. The Stan model definition is `here <https://github.com/aristoteleo/dynast-release/blob/main/dynast/models/pi.stan>`_.

Commit message:

add per cell fraction estimation

docs/technical_information.rst, after:

.. _technical_information:

Technical Information
=====================
This section details technical information of the quantification and statistical estimation procedures of the :code:`dynast count` and :code:`dynast estimate` commands. Descriptions of :code:`dynast ref` and :code:`dynast align` commands are in :ref:`pipeline_usage`.

.. image:: _static/steps.svg
	:width: 700
	:align: center

Count procedure
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^
:code:`dynast count` procedure consists of three steps:

1. :ref:`parse`
2. :ref:`snp`
3. :ref:`quant`

.. _parse:

:code:`parse`
'''''''''''''
1. All gene and transcript information are parsed from the gene annotation GTF (:code:`-g`) and saved as Python pickles :code:`genes.pkl.gz` and :code:`transcripts.pkl.gz`, respectively.
2. All aligned reads are parsed from the input BAM and output to :code:`conversions.csv` and :code:`no_conversions.csv`. The former contains a line for every conversion, and the latter contains a line for every read that does not have any conversions. Note that no conversion filtering (:code:`--quality`) is performed in this step. Two :code:`.idx` files are also output, corresponding to each of these CSVs, which are used downstream for fast parsing. Splicing types are also assigned in this step if :code:`--no-splicing` was not provided.

.. _snp:

:code:`snp`
'''''''''''
This step is skipped if :code:`--snp-threshold` is not specified.

1. Read coverage of the genome is computed by parsing all aligned reads from the input BAM and output to :code:`coverage.csv`.
2. SNPs are detected by calculating, for every genomic position, the fraction of reads with a conversion at that position over its coverage. If this fraction is greater than :code:`--snp-threshold`, then the genomic position is written to the output file :code:`snps.csv`. Any conversion with PHRED quality less than or equal to :code:`--quality` is not counted as a conversion.

.. _quant:

:code:`quant`
'''''''''''''
1. For every read, the numbers of each conversion (A>C, A>G, A>T, C>A, etc.) and nucleotide content (how many of A, C, G, T there are in the region that the read aligned to) are counted. Any SNPs provided with :code:`--snp-csv` or detected from the :ref:`snp` step are not counted. If both are present, the union is used. Additionally, Any conversion with PHRED quality less than or equal to :code:`--quality` is not counted as a conversion.
2. For UMI-based technologies, reads are deduplicated by the following order of priority: 1) read that aligns to the transcriptome, 2) read with the most conversions specified with :code:`--conversion`. If multiple conversions are provided, the sum is used. Reads are considered duplicates if they share the same barcode, UMI, and gene assignment. For plate-based technologies, read deduplication should have been performed in the alignment step (in the case of STAR, with the :code:`--soloUMIdedup Exact`), but in the case of multimapping reads, it becomes a bit more tricky. If a read is multimapping such that some alignments map to the transcriptome while some do not, the transcriptome alignment is taken (there can not be multiple transcriptome alignments, as this is a constraint within STAR). If none align to the transcriptome and the alignments are assigned to multiple genes, the read is dropped, as it is impossible to assign the read with confidence. If none align to the transcriptome and the alignments are assigned multiple velocity types, the velocity type is manually set to :code:`ambiguous` and the first alignment is kept. If none of these cases are true, the first alignment is kept. The final deduplicated/de-multimapped counts are output to :code:`counts_{conversions}.csv`, where :code:`{conversions}` is an underscore-delimited list of all conversions provided with :code:`--conversion`.

.. Note:: All bases in this file are relative to the forward genomic strand. For example, a read mapped to a gene on the reverse genomic strand should be complemented to get the actual bases.

Output Anndata
''''''''''''''
All results are compiled into a single AnnData :code:`H5AD` file. The AnnData object contains the following:

* The *transcriptome* read counts in :code:`.X`. Here, *transcriptome* reads are the mRNA read counts that are usually output from conventional scRNA-seq quantification pipelines. In technical terms, these are reads that contain the BAM tag provided with the :code:`--gene-tag` (default is :code:`GX`).
* Unlabeled and labeled *transcriptome* read counts in :code:`.layers['X_n_{conversion}']` and :code:`.layers['X_l_{conversion}']`.

The following layers are also present if :code:`--no-splicing` or :code:`--transcriptome-only` was *NOT* specified.

* The *total* read counts in :code:`.layers['total']`.
* Unlabeled and labeled *total* read counts in :code:`.layers['unlabeled_{conversion}']` and :code:`.layers['labeled_{conversion}']`.
* Spliced, unspliced and ambiguous read counts in :code:`.layers['spliced']`, :code:`.layers['unspliced']` and :code:`.layers['ambiguous']`.
* Unspliced unlabeled, unspliced labeled, spliced unlabeled, spliced labeled read counts in :code:`.layers['un_{conversion}']`, :code:`.layers['ul_{conversion}']`, :code:`.layers['sn_{conversion}']` and :code:`.layers['sl_{conversion}']` respectively.

The following equalities always hold for the resulting Anndata.

* :code:`.layers['total'] == .layers['spliced'] + .layers['unspliced'] + .layers['ambiguous']`

The following additional equalities always hold for the resulting Anndata in the case of single labeling (:code:`--conversion` was specified once).

* :code:`.X == .layers['X_n_{conversion}'] + .layers['X_l_{conversion}']`
* :code:`.layers['spliced'] == .layers['sn_{conversion}'] + .layers['sl_{conversion}']`
* :code:`.layers['unspliced'] == .layers['un_{conversion}'] + .layers['ul_{conversion}']`

.. Tip:: To quantify splicing data from conventional scRNA-seq experiments (experiments without metabolic labeling), we recommend using the `kallisto | bustools <https://www.kallistobus.tools/>`_ pipeline.

Estimate procedure
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^
:code:`dynast estimate` procedure consists of two steps:

1. :ref:`aggregate`
2. :ref:`estimate`

.. _aggregate:

:code:`aggregate`
'''''''''''''''''
For each cell and gene and for each conversion provided with :code:`--conversion`, the conversion counts are aggregated into a CSV file such that each row contains the following columns: cell barcode, gene, conversion count, nucleotide content of the original base (i.e. if the conversion is T>C, this would be T), and the number of reads that have this particular barcode-gene-conversion-content combination. This procedure is done for all read groups that exist (see :ref:`read_groups`).

.. _estimate:

:code:`estimate`
''''''''''''''''
1. The background conversion rate :math:`p_e` is estimated, if :code:`--p-e` was not provided (see :ref:`background_estimation`). If :code:`--p-e` was provided, this value is used and estimation is skipped. :math:`p_e`s are written to :code:`p_e.csv`.
2. The induced conversion rate :math:`p_c` is estimated using an expectation maximization (EM) approach, for each conversion provided with :code:`--conversion` (see :ref:`induced_rate_estimation`). :math:`p_c`s are written to :code:`p_c_{conversion}.csv` where :code:`{conversion}` is an underscore-delimited list of each conversion (because multiple conversions can be introduced in a single timepoint). This step is skipped for control samples with :code:`--control`.
3. Finally, the fraction of labeled RNA per cell :math:`\pi_c` and per cell-gene :math:`\pi_g` are estimated. The resulting fractions are written to CSV files named :code:`pi_c_xxx.csv` and :code:`pi_xxx.csv`, where the former contains estimations per cell and the latter contains estimations per cell-gene.

Output Anndata
''''''''''''''
All results are compiled into a single AnnData :code:`H5AD` file. The AnnData object contains the following:

* The *transcriptome* read counts in :code:`.X`. Here, *transcriptome* reads are the mRNA read counts that are usually output from conventional scRNA-seq quantification pipelines. In technical terms, these are reads that contain the BAM tag provided with the :code:`--gene-tag` (default is :code:`GX`).
* Unlabeled and labeled *transcriptome* read counts in :code:`.layers['X_n_{conversion}']` and :code:`.layers['X_l_{conversion}']`. If :code:`--reads transcriptome` was specified, the estimated counts are in :code:`.layers['X_n_{conversion}_est']` and :code:`.layers['X_l_{conversion}_est']`. :code:`{conversion}` is an underscore-delimited list of each conversion provided with :code:`--conversion` when running :code:`dynast count`.
* Per cell estimated parameters in corresponding columns of :code:`.obs`. These include the estimated :math:`p_e` in :code:`.obs['p_e']`, :math:`p_c` in :code:`.obs['p_c_{conversion}']`, and per cell estimated fractions of labeled RNA in :code:`.obs['pi_c_{group}_{conversion}']` where :code:`{group}` is all possible read groups.

The following layers are also present if :code:`--no-splicing` or :code:`--transcriptome-only` was *NOT* specified when running :code:`dynast count`.

* The *total* read counts in :code:`.layers['total']`.
* Unlabeled and labeled *total* read counts in :code:`.layers['unlabeled_{conversion}']` and :code:`.layers['labeled_{conversion}']`. If :code:`--reads total` is specified, the estimated counts are in :code:`.layers['unlabeled_{conversion}_est']` and :code:`.layers['labeled_{conversion}_est']`.
* Spliced, unspliced and ambiguous read counts in :code:`.layers['spliced']`, :code:`.layers['unspliced']` and :code:`.layers['ambiguous']`.
* Unspliced unlabeled, unspliced labeled, spliced unlabeled, spliced labeled read counts in :code:`.layers['un_{conversion}']`, :code:`.layers['ul_{conversion}']`, :code:`.layers['sn_{conversion}']` and :code:`.layers['sl_{conversion}']` respectively. If :code:`--reads spliced` and/or :code:`--reads unspliced` was specified, layers with estimated counts are added. These layers are suffixed with :code:`_est`, analogous to *total* counts above.

In addition to the equalities listed in the :ref:`quant` section, the following inequalities always hold for the resulting Anndata.

* :code:`.X >= .layers['X_n_{conversion}_est'] + .layers['X_l_{conversion}_est']`
* :code:`.layers['spliced'] >= .layers['sn_{conversion}_est'] + .layers['sl_{conversion}_est']`
* :code:`.layers['unspliced'] >= .layers['un_{conversion}_est'] + .layers['ul_{conversion}_est']`

.. Tip:: To quantify splicing data from conventional scRNA-seq experiments (experiments without metabolic labeling), we recommend using the `kallisto | bustools <https://www.kallistobus.tools/>`_ pipeline.

Caveats
'''''''
The statistical estimation procedure described above comes with some caveats.

* The induced conversion rate (:math:`p_c`) can not be estimated for cells with too few reads (defined by the option :code:`--cell-threshold`).
* The fraction of labeled RNA (:math:`\pi_g`) can not be estimated for cell-gene combinations with too few reads (defined by the option :code:`--cell-gene-threshold`).

For statistical definitions of these variables, see :ref:`statistical_estimation`.

Therefore, for low coverage data, we expect many cell-gene combinations to not have any estimations in the Anndata layers prefixed with :code:`_est`, indicated with zeros. It is possible to construct a boolean mask that contains :code:`True` for cell-gene combinations that were successfully estimated and :code:`False` otherwise. Note that we are using *total* reads.

.. code-block:: python

  estimated_mask = ((adata.layers['labeled_{conversion}'] + adata.layers['unlabeled_{conversion}']) > 0) & \
      ((adata.layers['labeled_{conversion}_est'] + adata.layers['unlabeled_{conversion}_est']) > 0)

Similarly, it is possible to construct a boolean mask that contains :code:`True` for cell-gene combinations for which estimation failed (either due to having too few reads mapping at the cell level or the cell-gene level) and :code:`False` otherwise.

.. code-block:: python

  failed_mask = ((adata.layers['labeled_{conversion}'] + adata.layers['unlabeled_{conversion}']) > 0) & \
      ((adata.layers['labeled_{conversion}_est'] + adata.layers['unlabeled_{conversion}_est']) == 0)

The same can be done with other :ref:`read_groups`.

.. _read_groups:

Read groups
^^^^^^^^^^^
Dynast separates reads into read groups, and each of these groups are processed together.

* :code:`total`: All reads. Used only when :code:`--no-splicing` or :code:`--transcriptome-only` is not used.
* :code:`transcriptome`: Reads that map to the transcriptome. These are reads that have the :code:`GX` tag in the BAM (or whatever you provide for the :code:`--gene-tag` argument). This group also represents all reads when :code:`--no-splicing` or :code:`--transcriptome-only` is used.
* :code:`spliced`: Spliced reads
* :code:`unspliced`: Unspliced reads
* :code:`ambiguous`: Ambiguous reads

The latter three groups are mutually exclusive.

.. _statistical_estimation:

Statistical estimation
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^
Dynast can statistically estimate unlabeled and labeled RNA counts by modeling the distribution as a binomial mixture model [Jürges2018]_. Statistical estimation can be run with :code:`dynast estimate` (see :ref:`estimate`).

Overview
''''''''
First, we define the following model parameters. For the remainder of this section, let the conversion be T>C. Note that all parameters are calculated per barcode (i.e. cell) unless otherwise specified.

.. math::

  \begin{align*}
	  p_e &: \text{average conversion rate in unlabeled RNA}\\
		p_c &: \text{average conversion rate in labeled RNA}\\
		\pi_g &: \text{fraction of labeled RNA for gene } g\\
		y &: \text{number of observed T>C conversions (in a read)}\\
		n &: \text{number of T bases in the genomic region (a read maps to)}
	\end{align*}

Then, the probability of observing :math:`k` conversions given the above parameters is

.. math::

	\mathbb{P}(k;p_e,p_c,n,\pi) = (1-\pi_g) B(k;n,p_e) + \pi_g B(k;n,p_c)

where :math:`B(k,n,p)` is the binomial PMF. The goal is to calculate :math:`\pi_g`, which can be used the split the raw counts to get the estimated counts. We can extract :math:`k` and :math:`n` directly from the read alignments, while calculating :math:`p_e` and :math:`p_c` is more complicated (detailed below).

.. _background_estimation:

Background estimation (:math:`p_e`)
'''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''
If we have control samples (i.e. samples without the conversion-introducing treatment), we can calculate :math:`p_e` directly by simply calculating the mutation rate of T to C. This is exactly what dynast does for :code:`--control` samples. All cells are aggregated when calculating :math:`p_e` for control samples.

Otherwise, we need to use other mutation rates as a proxy for the real T>C background mutation rate. In this case, :math:`p_e` is calculated as the average conversion rate of all non-T bases to any other base. Mathematically,

.. math::

	p_e = average(r(A,C), r(A,G), \cdots, r(G,T))

where :math:`r(X,Y)` is the observed conversion rate from X to Y, and :math:`average` is the function that calculates the average of its arguments. Note that we do not use the conversion rates of conversions that start with a T. This is because T>C is our induced mutation, and this artificially deflates the T>A, T>G mutation rates (which can skew our :math:`p_e` estimation to be lower than it should). In the event that multiple conversions are of interest, and they span all four bases as the initial base, then :math:`p_e` estimation falls back to using all other conversions (regardless of start base).

.. _induced_rate_estimation:

Induced rate estimation (:math:`p_c`)
'''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''
:math:`p_c` is estimated via an expectation maximization (EM) algorithm by constructing a sparse matrix :math:`A` where each element :math:`a_{k,n}` is the number of reads with :math:`k` T>C conversions and :math:`n` T bases in the genomic region that each read align to. Assuming :math:`p_e < p_c`, we treat :math:`a_{k,n}` as missing data if greater than or equal to 1% of the count is expected to originate from the :math:`p_e` component. Mathematically, :math:`a_{k,n}` is excluded if

.. math::

	e_{k,n}=B(k,n,p_e) \cdot \sum_{k' \geq k} a_{k',n} > 0.01 a_{k,n}

Let :math:`X=\{(k_1,n_1),\cdots\}` be the excluded data. The E step fills in the excluded data by their expected values given the current estimate :math:`p_c^{(t)}`,

.. math::

	a_{k,n}^{(t+1)} = \frac{\sum_{(k',n) \not\in X} B(k,n,p_c^{(t)}) \cdot a_{k',n}}{\sum_{(k',n) \not\in X} B(k',n,p_c^{(t)})}

The M step updates the estimate for :math:`p_c`

.. math::

	p_c^{(t+1)} = \frac{\sum_{k,n} ka_{k,n}^{(t+1)}}{\sum_{k,n} na_{k,n}^{(t+1)}}

.. _bayesian_inference:

Bayesian inference (:math:`\pi_g`)
''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''
The fraction of labeled RNA per cell :math:`\pi_c` and per cell-gene :math:`\pi_g` are estimated with Bayesian inference using the binomial mixture model described above. A Markov chain Monte Carlo (MCMC) approach is applied using the :math:`p_e`, :math:`p_c`, and the matrix :math:`A` found/estimated in previous steps. This estimation procedure is implemented with `pyStan <https://pystan.readthedocs.io/en/latest/>`_, which is a Python interface to the Bayesian inference package `Stan <https://mc-stan.org/>`_. The Stan model definition is `here <https://github.com/aristoteleo/dynast-release/blob/main/dynast/models/pi.stan>`_.
